# miniforth

`miniforth` is a real mode [FORTH] that fits in an MBR boot sector.
The following standard words are available:

```
+ - ! @ c! c@ dup drop swap emit u. >r r> [ ] : ; load
```

Additionally, there is one non-standard word. `s: ( buf -- buf+len )` will copy the
rest of the current input buffer to `buf`, and terminate it with a null byte. The address
of said null byte will be pushed onto the stack. This is designed for saving the code being
ran to later put it in a disk block, when no block editor is available yet.

The dictionary is case-sensitive. If a word is not found, it is converted into a number
with no error checking. For example, `g` results in the decimal 16, extending
the `0123456789abcdef` of hexadecimal. On boot, the number base is set to hexadecimal.

Backspace works, but not how you're used to — the erased input will be still visible on
screen until you write something else.

*Various aspects of this project's internals are described in detail [on my blog][blog].*

## Trying it out

You can either build a disk image yourself (see below), or download one from
[the releases page].

When Miniforth boots, no prompt will be shown on the screen. However, if what
you're typing is being shown on the screen, it is working. You can:

 - do some arithmetic: `1 2 + u.`
 - load additional functionality from disk: `1 load`
   (see [*Onwards from miniforth*](#onwards-from-miniforth) below).

## Building a disk image

You will need `yasm` and `python3`, which you can obtain with `nix-shell` or
your package manager of choice. Then run `./build.sh`.

This will create the following artifacts:

- `boot.bin` - the built bootsector.
- `uefix.bin` - the chainloader (see below).
- `disk.img` - a disk image with the contents of `block*.fth` installed into
  the blocks.
- `boot.lst` - a listing with the raw bytes of each instruction.
   Note that the `dd 0xdeadbeef` are removed by `compress.py`.

The build will print the number of used bytes, as well as the number of block files found.
You can run the resulting disk image in QEMU with `./run.sh`, or pass `./run.sh boot.bin`
if you do not want to include the code from `*.fth` in your disk. QEMU will run in curses
mode, exit with <kbd>Alt</kbd> + <kbd>2</kbd>, <kbd>q</kbd>, <kbd>Enter</kbd>.

## UEFI sucks, or `uefix.bin`

Running Miniforth on real hardware is certainly possible. In fact, I hardly use
emulation for it these days. Anything not unreasonably old should work. However,
most implementations of UEFI have a bug/misfeature where they try to parse the
partition table of an MBR before booting from it. As Miniforth does not include
a partition table in the bootsector (as there is simply no space for it), this
prevents booting on most UEFI computers.

To remedy this, this repository includes a small chainloader as a workaround.
So, instead of this disk layout, which works on computers old enough:

```
LBA 0   - boot.bin
LBA 1   - unused
LBA 2-3 - Forth block 1
...       ...
```

...the disk image generated by `build.sh` looks as follows:

```
LBA 0   - uefix.bin
LBA 1   - boot.bin
LBA 2-3 - Forth block 1
...       ...
```

## Blocks

`load ( blk -- )` loads a 1K block of FORTH source code from disk and executes it.
All other block operations are deferred to user code. Thus, after appropriate setup,
one can get an arbitrarily feature-rich system by simply typing `1 load` —
see [*Onwards from miniforth*](#onwards-from-miniforth) below.

Each pair of sectors on disk forms a single block. Block number 0 is partially used
by the MBR, and is thus reserved.

## System variables

Due to space constraints, variables such as `STATE` or `BASE` couldn't be exposed by creating
separate words. Depending on the variable, the address is either hardcoded or pushed onto
the stack on boot:

 - `>IN` is a word at `0xa02`. It stores the pointer to the first unparsed character
   of the null-terminated input buffer.
 - The stack on boot is `LATEST STATE BASE HERE #DISK` (with `#DISK` on top).
 - `STATE` has a non-standard format - it is a byte, where `0` means compiling,
   and `1` means interpreting.
 - `#DISK` is not a variable, but the saved disk number of the boot media

## Onwards from miniforth

The main goal of the project is bootstrapping a full system on top of Miniforth
as a seed. Thus the repository also contains various Forth code that may run on
top of Miniforth and extend its capabilities.

 - In `bootstrap.fth` (`1 load`):
   - A simple assembler is implemented, and then used to implement additional
     primitives, which wouldn't fit in Miniforth itself. This includes control
     flow words like `IF`/`THEN` and `BEGIN`/`UNTIL`, as well as calls to the BIOS
     disk interrupt to allow manipulating the code on disk.

     For the syntax of the assembler, see [*No branches? No problem — a Forth
     assembler*][branch-blog].

   - Exception handling is implemented, with semantics a little different from
     standard Forth. See [*Contextful exceptions with Forth
     metaprogramming*][exception-blog].
   - A separate, more featureful outer interpreter overrides the one built into
     Miniforth, to correct the ugly backspace behavior and handle things
     such as uncaught exceptions and vocabularies.
   - A way of searching for occurences of a particular string in the code stored
     in the blocks is provided:
     - `10 20 grep create` searches blocks `$10` through `$20` inclusive for
       occurences of `create`
     - If your search term includes spaces, use `grep"` — the syntax is similar
       to `s"` string literals: `10 20 grep" : >number"`
 - In `editor.fth` (`30 load`), a vi-like block editor is implemented. It can be started
   with e.g. `10 edit` to edit block 10.
   - Non-standard keybindings:
     - <kbd>Q</kbd> to quit back to the Forth REPL.
     - <kbd>[</kbd> to look at the previous block.
     - <kbd>]</kbd> to look at the next block.
   - After first use, you can use the shorthand `ed` to reopen the last-edited block.
   - Use `run` to execute the last-edited block. This sets a flag to prevent
     a chain of `-->` from loading all the subsequent blocks.
   - Changes are saved to disk whenever you use `run` or open a different block with `edit`
     or the <kbd>[</kbd>/<kbd>]</kbd> keybinds. You can also trigger this
     manually with `save`.

All this code was originally developed within Miniforth itself, which meant it was
stored within a disk image — a format that's not very friendly to tooling like
Git or GitHub's web interface. This disparity is handled by two Python scripts:

 - `mkdisk.py` takes the files and merges them into a bootable disk image;
 - `splitdisk.py` extracts the code from a disk image's blocks and splits
   it into files.

## Free bytes

At this moment, not counting the `55 AA` signature at the end, **499** bytes are used,
leaving 11 bytes for any potential improvements.

Byte saving leaderboard:
 - Ilya Kurdyukov saved 24 bytes. Thanks!
 - Peter Ferrie saved 5 bytes. Thanks!

If a feature is strongly desirable, potential tradeoffs include:

 - 1 byte: Use a `SPECIAL_BYTE` for compression such that it can be turned into
   `0xad` with `inc [di-1]` or another instruction of the same size. This has
   the disadvantage that avoiding occurances of `SPECIAL_BYTE` becomes harder,
   and the solution of simply changing the special byte no longer works.
 - ?? bytes: Don't expose the `BASE` variable, hardcode hexadecimal — as it
   turns out, it is not that useful. The current bootstrap doesn't make use of
   `BASE` in the initial interpreter.
 - 7 bytes: Remove the `-` word (with the expectation that the user will assemble their
   own primitives later anyway).
 - 6 bytes: Remove the `+` word (with the expectation that the user will define `: negate 0 swap - ; : + negate - ;`
   - Note that bootstrapping with neither `+` nor `-` would be, to put it mildly, quite hard.
 - 12 bytes: Remove the `emit` word.
 - 9 bytes: Don't push the addresses of variables kept by self-modifying code. This
   essentially changes the API with each edit (NOTE: it's 9 bytes because this makes it
   beneficial to keep `>IN` in the literal field of an instruction).
 - ?? bytes: Instead of storing the names of the primitives, let the user pick their own
   names on boot. This would take very little new code — the decompressor would simply have
   to borrow some code from `:`. However, reboots would become somewhat bothersome.

[FORTH]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forth_(programming_language)
[blog]: https://compilercrim.es/bootstrap/
[branch-blog]: https://compilercrim.es/bootstrap/branches/
[exception-blog]: https://compilercrim.es/bootstrap/exception-context/
[the releases page]: https://github.com/meithecatte/miniforth/releases/
